# DB_SubstanceAbuseTreatmentClinic
Student Project to design a database for small substance abuse clinic.
Substance Abuse Treatment Center
The purpose of this project is demonstrating the importance of utilization relational database for the purpose of data analysis in healthcare. Thus, using Standard Development Life Cycle (SDLC) process I am going to design and build a database   designing a database for a small substance treatment clinic. The database is going to build foe the purposes of collecting, analyzing, billing and storing patient information with the goal of improving healthcare delivery. 
Also , in this we are going to use SQL to help with acquiring data, cleaning data, and modeling it for use in our  production process. The project will contain three parts or stages as part of the design process. The initial step will involve identifying a problem for a database and describing its purpose. The second part allows me to design the database components. The third part requires me to present the database proposal to stakeholders.  Other factors or elements I will consider as part my design process will also include   communication, collaborate and feedback from stake holders at every stage of the development life cycle.  
In addition , to ensure project success important questions  will need to be  answered  along the way as we journey through this process. These question are as follows :-

       1) What is the importance of Information Technology  (IT) within context health and database development ? 
2)Describe the project goals and clear measurable objectives for the database?
3)Identify the steps  I will take to meet the goals and objectives.?
4)Forecast any potential problems or barriers to meeting the project goals and objectives?
5)Are there any specific assumptions that need to be made? 
6)	Conclude with the value of the project with emphasis on feasibility and the benefit of the expected results ?


Database Project Proposal: Part 1
Electronic filing systems are a necessity with the advancing demands of the electronic age. A database provides healthcare organizations an efficient way to manage different types of data in a single location. Prescription errors continue to be a major problem that healthcare facilities deal with regularly. “To prevent prescription errors caused by information systems, a database to store complete and accurate drug information in a user-friendly format is needed” (Okuya, Kimura, Ohkura, & Tsuchiya, 2013). The proposed database will attempt to capture the clinical data that is related to pharmaceutical products and utilization. The goal of the final database is to identify a correlation between narcotic addiction rates and the original year that the patient consumed a narcotic.
Project Problem and Definition of Terms
	Narcotics are often prescribed to patients following many healthcare procedures like surgeries. Prescription drug abuse has risen to unprecedented levels. Death from narcotic prescription painkillers have increased sixfold since 1999 (Anderson, 2020). The proposed database will facilitate physicians when ordering narcotics to know when the patient was last prescribed a narcotic and if the patient has been seen and/or treated for narcotic addiction/abuse.
Database Users
	The database users will be hospital doctors and nurses and the hospital pharmacists. Ideally, this will be a nationwide database, however the proposed project will begin with one hospital and expand from there. The localsubstance abuse treatment program (SATP) staff will also be users of the database to enter information collected from their facility. The SATP staff includes physicians, nurses, and pharmacists.

Types of Data to Collect for Proposed Database and Reports for Analysis
The data that will need to be collected for this database includes an accurate tracking of narcotic addiction rates and the original narcotic consumption to include the percentage rates of addiction and the original year that the narcotic was consumed. This data will be collected from the hospital participating in the initial startup for this database. The SATP resident profile information and the narcotic consumed will add additional data needed to track usage by person. The reports that will be generated for analysis are specific drug causing the addiction, the number of times the patient returned to hospital for additional narcotics, and if the patient is seeking treatment for their addiction. These reports will facilitate in the hospital organization knowing which medication, if any, is causing more addition problems. These reports will also indicate the frequency the hospital is writing narcotic prescriptions to the same patient. Finally, these reports will facilitate in knowing if the patient has sought help for their narcotic abuse/addiction.  
Project Goals and Clear Measurable Objectives for the Database
In an effort to promote better decision-making by physicians ordering narcotics, the proposed database can be used to support data warehousing, reporting, and mining. The database will act as a warehouse in the sense that it will capture and store data in real-time on narcotic prescriptions.  Database system users will be able to “query multiple and diverse data sources to create integrated reports” (Coronel & Morris, 2017). Analysis of the information contained within the database can “uncoverhidden trends, patterns, and relationships”, thereby contributing to the knowledge acquisition of data mining (Coronel & Morris, 2017). Utilization of these three facets can help transform the operational data into decision support data (Coronel & Morris, 2017). 
Potential Problems or Barriers to Meeting the Project Goals and Objectives
	The main problem that this database can encounter is if patients are using different identifications at the hospital and/or treatment facility. If their name is spelled differently, their date of birth is different, or any other personal identification is inconsistent, the database will not be able to recognize the patient from previous encounters. Another problem that will arise with the initial database is if the patient goes to different hospitals for new prescriptions. The initial database will only include data from one hospital and therefore will not be able to detect if the patient goes to different facilities. This is also true if the patient visits different treatment/rehab facilities.
	When considering the value that this database will provide, if this database can save one individual from narcotic abuse or death then the value is invaluable despite minimal success. If this database is a success at one facility and more data can be obtained from other hospitals and treatment facilities, then the benefit of the database will only increase recognition of narcotic abuse and potentially save more lives as well as save on healthcare costs that are attributed to narcotic abuse.

